[DOCU-2499] decK: 3.0 migration guide (#4485)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: src/deck/guides/3.0-upgrade.md

---
title: Upgrade to Kong Gateway 3.x
content-type: reference
---

> With the [release of {{site.base_gateway}} 3.0](/gateway/changelog/), paths that use regular expressions are no longer automatically detected.

Reviewer: Here we're talking about `paths`, but which ones? It may not be super obvious that we are referring to routes' paths

For {{site.base_gateway}} to parse a path that contains a regular expression, the path must be prefixed with a **`~`**.

> For example, in 2.x, a route that was expressed like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, in 2.x, a route path that was expressed like this:
```

This causes configuration drift between the formats of the routes that exist in the database and the routes in your configuration file.

Before using your state files to update the database, convert them into the 3.0 format using `deck convert`.

{:.important}
> **Important**: Don't use `deck sync` with {{site.base_gateway}} 3.x before converting paths into the 3.0 format.
This will break all regex routing in 3.x.

## Convert declarative configuration files

1. Run `deck-convert` against your 2.x state file to turn it into a 3.x file:

    ```sh
    deck convert \
    --from kong-gateway-2.x \
    --to kong-gateway-3.x \
    --input-file kong.yaml \
    --output-file new-kong.yaml
    ```

    This command upgrades the `_format_version` setting to `3.0` and adds the `~` prefix to all route paths containing a regex pattern.

    You can leave `input-file` out to convert all declarative configuration files in your working directory.
    We recommend specifying both input and output files.

2. Validate the converted files in a test environment.

>     Perform manual audits of the generated file before applying the configuration in production.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean running a deck diff? Or some combination of `deck validate`, `deck diff`? If so we should express that explicitly in step 2. If it's more complicated than that, then we should leave it.

Author: It's more complicated than that. As in, you have to literally look at your file and make sure that everything is correct.

Author: Rephrased for clarity.

>     Perform manual audits of the generated file before applying the configuration in production.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Perform a manual audit of the generated file before applying the configuration in production.
```

This causes configuration drift between the formats of the routes that exist in the database and the routes in your configuration file.

Before using your state files to update the database, convert them into the 3.0 format using `deck convert`.

{:.important}
> **Important**: Don't use `deck sync` with {{site.base_gateway}} 3.x before converting paths into the 3.0 format.
This will break all regex routing in 3.x.

## Convert declarative configuration files

1. Run `deck-convert` against your 2.x state file to turn it into a 3.x file:

    ```sh
    deck convert \
    --from kong-gateway-2.x \
    --to kong-gateway-3.x \
    --input-file kong.yaml \
    --output-file new-kong.yaml
    ```

    This command upgrades the `_format_version` setting to `3.0` and adds the `~` prefix to all route paths containing a regex pattern.

    You can leave `input-file` out to convert all declarative configuration files in your working directory.
    We recommend specifying both input and output files.

2. Validate the converted files in a test environment.

>     These changes may not be fully correct or exhaustive, so perform manual audits of the generated file before applying

Author: I did stronger wording in the note below, but I'll combine that note & this statement to avoid losing their attention.

    the configuration in production.

    {:.important}
    > **Important**: Manual validation is strongly recommended.
    Incorrect changes will result in unintended traffic routing by {{site.base_gateway}}.

## FAQ

**What happens if I set the format version to 3.0 but don't update regex paths?**

You should avoid setting the format version manually.

> When you sync the file without updating regex paths, the incorrect values will be pushed to the database and your routes will break.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 routes will break.
```

nit: routes don't break, a more technically accurate statement will be "and Kong will route traffic incorrectly."

decK will issue a warning stating that an invalid regex pattern was detected and that it must be updated with a `~` to distinguish it from a standard prefix match.

**I ran decK convert but there are still errors or warnings, what do I do?**

Manually validate the file, then make any necessary updates to your state file.

**Can I still apply configuration if there are warnings?**

If you have validated the configuration and found no issues but are still getting a warning,
the warning may be a false positive.
You can still apply the configuration, but do so at your own risk.

> 

Author: We generally don't, but I think we can make an exception for open source + major release.

---
title: Upgrade to Kong Gateway 3.x
---

Starting with {{site.base_gateway}} 3.0, paths using regular expressions must have a `~` prefix.
The decK format version must be `3.0` to work with the new paths.

If you [migrate your {{site.base_gateway}} database](/gateway/latest/upgrade/) from 2.8.x to 3.0, the paths in the database will have the `~` prefix added.

> This can cause configuration drift between state files and the database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This causes configuration drift because the routes that exist in the database, and the ones in your configuration file will use a different format.
```

> Before using your state files to update the database, convert them into 3.0 format using `deck convert`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Before using your state files to update the database, convert them into the 3.0 format using `deck convert`.
```

> Before using your state files to update the database, convert them into 3.0 format using `deck convert`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Convert decK files

You can use `deck convert` to convert your decK files to 3.0: 

1. Run `deck-convert` against your 2.x state file:

    ```sh
    deck convert \
    --from kong-gateway-2.x \
    --to kong-gateway-3.x \
    --input-file kong2.8.yaml \
    --output-file new-kong3.0.yaml
    ```

    You can leave `input-file` out to convert all declarative configuration files in your working directory.

2. Validate the converted files in a test environment.

    These changes may not be fully correct or exhaustive, so perform manual audits of the generated file before applying
    the configuration in production.

```

{:.important}

> > **Important**: Do not use `deck sync` with {{site.base_gateway}} 3.x before converting paths into 3.0 format.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> **Important**: Don't use `deck sync` with {{site.base_gateway}} 3.x before converting paths into the 3.0 format.
```

This will break all regex routing in 3.x.

> ## decK command behavior with 3.x

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Changes to decK commands in 3.x
```

Maybe move this into the FAQ section?

> When running decK commands against {{site.base_gateway}} 3.x, take note of the following behavior:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When running decK commands against {{site.base_gateway}} 3.x, keep the following behavior in mind:
```

`deck dump`
: Explicitly sets the format version to 3.0.
It assumes that the paths have been correctly transformed, either via Kong migrations, manually, or through a `deck convert`.

> `deck diff`, `deck validate`, or `deck sync`

Reviewer: Right now, the branch I'm working on is implementing these checks only for `sync` and `diff`. Should we add them for `validate` too? @hbagdi

Author: I pulled that info from the design brief. I can remove if that's not the intended state.

Reviewer: You're right, that was a miss from my side, apologise! 

I just added it [here](https://github.com/Kong/deck/pull/753/commits/bcb1f7e801614e71619d2f38af4b95645f593f24), please note that this makes sense only when `validate` is run with the `--online` flag, otherwise there is no way to check for the Kong version running.

: decK performs a check to ensure all regex routes are correctly prefixed.
If not, the behavior depends on the control plane type:

> * Self-managed {{site.base_gateway}} 2.x (format version 1.1 or earlier): Prints an error and stops the operation.

Reviewer: Would it be better to be as explicit as possible and use `_format_version` here? WDYT?

* Self-managed {{site.base_gateway}} 3.x (`_format_version: 3.0`): Prints a warning and goes ahead with the `diff`, `sync`, or `validate` operation as usual.
* {{site.konnect_short_name}}: Prints a warning and goes ahead with the `diff`, `sync`, or `validate` operation as usual.

`deck convert`
: Includes `--from` and `--to` flags for converting state files between major versions.
Converts all relevant files in the present working directory:
  * Upgrades the `_format_version` setting to `3.0`
  * Adds the `~` prefix to all route paths containing a regex pattern

: You can optionally provide `--input-file` and `--output-file` flags to limit conversion to
a subset of files.

> ### Using decK with {{site.konnect_short_name}} data planes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Using decK with {{site.konnect_short_name}} runtimes
```

I think?

Author: runtime instances in this case

{{site.konnect_short_name}} supports 3.x and 2.x data planes, but the {{site.konnect_short_name}} control plane version is 3.x.
Since decK can't tell if a runtime group is intended for 2.x or 3.x data planes, it will always dump configuration with `_format_version: 3.0`.

To avoid compatibility errors, make sure that all data planes in a single runtime group are of the same major version (all 2.x or all 3.x).

For all `diff`, `sync`, or `validate` (with `--online` flag) operations against {{site.konnect_short_name}}, decK issues warnings when it detects incorrect regex path configurations.

> ## Convert 2.x state file to 3.x
> 
> 1. Run `deck-convert` against your 2.x state file to turn it into a 3.x file:
> 
>     ```sh
>     deck convert \
>     --from kong-gateway-2.x \
>     --to kong-gateway-3.x \
>     --input-file kong.yaml \
>     --output-file new-kong.yaml
>     ```
> 
>     You can leave `input-file` out to convert all declarative configuration files in your working directory.
>     We recommend specifying both input and output files.
> 
> 
> 2. Validate the converted files in a test environment.
> 
>     These changes may not be fully correct or exhaustive, so perform manual audits of the generated file before applying
>     the configuration in production.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer 2: Moved up

## FAQ

**What happens if I set the format version to 3.0 but don't update regex paths?**

> The state file will be broken. Avoid setting the format version manually.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The state file will break. Avoid setting the format version manually.
```

> The state file will be broken. Avoid setting the format version manually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you sync the file, decK will issue a warning stating that an invalid regex pattern was detected and that it must be updated with a `~` to distinguish it from a standard prefix match. 
```

My understanding is that if you do this, it will still work. The state is broken, but this will overwrite your database values and you will not be able to access regex routes anymore.

**Can I still apply configuration if there are warnings?**

If you have validated the configuration and found no issues but are still getting a warning,
the warning may be a false positive.
You can still apply the configuration, but do so at your own risk.

> **I ran decK convert but there are still errors or warnings, what do I do?**

Reviewer 2: I think this one can go above the previous FAQ.
